Imam Bayildi

YIELD
Serves 4

TIME
2 hours 45 minutes

There are many recipes for the iconic Turkish eggplant dish, Imam Bayildi. Most
call for much more olive oil than this recipe does. There’s quite a bit in this
one, but it’s a much lighter dish than the classic. Make sure to simmer this
over very low heat as it cooks for a long time.

INGREDIENTS

2 medium or 4 small eggplants, cut in half lengthwise
1 large or 2 medium onions, sliced very thin
6 garlic cloves, finely chopped
1 ½ pounds (3 large or 6 medium) tomatoes, peeled and chopped
¼ cup finely chopped fresh parsley
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh dill
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh basil (optional)
Salt
¼ cup olive oil
¼ cup water
2 ½ teaspoons sugar
2 tablespoons lemon juice (optional)

PREPARATION
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees. Line a baking sheet with foil or parchment and
brush with olive oil. Slit the eggplants down the middle, being careful not to
cut through the skin. Place on the baking sheet and bake for 20 minutes, until
the outer skin begins to shrivel. Remove from the oven and transfer, cut side
down, to a colander set in the sink. Allow to drain for 30 minutes.

Meanwhile, heat 2 tablespoons of the olive oil over medium heat in a large,
lidded skillet and add the onions. Cook, stirring often, until the onions are
very tender, 5 to 8 minutes, and add the garlic. Cook, stirring, for 30 seconds
to a minute, until fragrant. Remove from the heat and transfer to a bowl. Add
the tomatoes, herbs, salt to taste and 1 teaspoon of the sugar and 1 tablespoon
of the remaining oil.

Turn the eggplants over and place in the pan, cut side up. Season with salt.
Fill with the onion and tomato mixture. Mix together the remaining olive oil,
the remaining sugar, the water and the lemon juice. Drizzle over and around the
eggplants. Cover the pan and place over low heat. Cook gently for 1 to 1 1/2
hours, checking the pan for liquid and basting from time to time with the liquid
in the pan, and adding water to the pan if it becomes too dry. By the end of
cooking the eggplants should be practically flat and the liquid in the pan
slightly caramelized. Spoon this juice over the eggplant. Allow to cool in the
pan, and serve at room temperature.


